---
date: '2022-05-05'
title: Synapse 1.58 released
categories:
- Releases
author: Brendan Abolivier
---

[Synapse 1.58](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.58.0) is
out! Let's dive into this new release.

# Poetry

If you've been reading the past few Synapse release announcements, you might
have already heard about our efforts to integrate
[Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) into Synapse. Poetry is a tool to package
and manage dependencies of a Python project, and comes with neat features such
as lock files and deterministic dependency resolution.

During the past few months, we've been hard at work with improving dependency
management in Synapse, with a goal to make Synapse builds more reproducible and
have more control over all dependencies, both direct and transitive. Synapse
1.58 is the first version that supports using Poetry to manage dependencies,
which will help a lot in ensuring the stability and security of Synapse
installations.

Huge props to [David](https://github.com/DMRobertson) from the Synapse team for
leading the work on this front.

## Everything else

This release of Synapse also includes performance improvements around sharing
device list updates, which should greatly improve login times for large Matrix
accounts.

Synapse 1.58 also includes the implementation of two MSCs:
[MSC3383](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3383) to
include destination in federation authentication headers, and
[MSC2815](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2815) which
(if enabled) allows room moderators to see the content of a redacted event (as
long as it hasn't already been deleted by the homeserver).

See the [full
changelog](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.58.0) for a
complete list of changes in this release. Also please have a look at the
[upgrade
notes](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.58/upgrade#upgrading-to-v1580)
for this version.

Synapse is a Free and Open Source Software project, and we'd like to extend our
thanks to everyone who contributed to this release, including (in no particular
order) [Beeper](https://www.beeper.com/), [Dirk
Klimpel](https://github.com/dklimpel), [Famedly](https://famedly.com/) and
[Sami Olmari](https://github.com/olmari).
