+++
title = "Senior Developer Relationship Engineer"
date = "2026-03-04"

[extra]
active = true
+++

**Job Title:** Senior Developer Relationship Engineer  
**Job Type:** Full-time, Contractor  
**Location:** Remote  
**Supervisor:** Managing Director of The Matrix.org Foundation

---

## Main Duties

The Matrix.org Foundation is looking for a Senior Developer Relations Engineer to promote Matrix, animate the developer community and make it a compelling experience to develop on Matrix. The main responsibility will be to liaise with the existing Matrix community, and develop new relations with vendors to incentivize them to contribute to the Foundation and build tools based on Matrix.

## Key Tasks

* Events  
  * Organise events for the Matrix community to gather, including The Matrix Conference and FOSDEM Fringe Event, with support from the Foundation’s Events Working Group.  
  * Maintain a Foundation presence at other events (e.g. FOSDEM, FrOSCon) with support from the Foundation’s Events Working group.  
  * Organise technical events such as hackathons.  
* Communications  
  * Maintain a Foundation online presence (e.g. Hacker News, Lobste.rs, social media) with support from the Foundation’s Website & Content Working Group.  
  * Produce weekly video content (Matrix Live) to highlight the latest developments in the Matrix ecosystem and illustrate its vibrancy and diversity, with support from the Website & Content Working Group.  
  * Issue the weekly blog post This Week in Matrix to give a pulse of the Matrix community, with support from the Website & Content Working Group.  
  * Manage the matrix.org website in collaboration with the Foundation’s Website & Content Working Group and internal communications resources.  
  * Maintain the ecosystem pages up to date on the matrix.org website  
* Community relations  
  * Keep track of the various projects in the ecosystem and companies building on top of Matrix  
  * Animate the Foundation’s community rooms in partnership with the community  
  * Be the point of contact for developers from professional organisations building on top of Matrix  
  * Define and implement a strategy to improve the developer experience (documentation…)  
  * Represent the community internally  
* Set the relevant Working Groups for success by liaising with the Foundation staff and the Governing Board, helping them set priorities and tracking progress.  
* Monitor the Foundation’s main communication channels, notably the Office of the Foundation room.

## Experience

* At least 3 years doing Developer Relationships or a similar role.  
* Experience creating technical content.  
* Involvement in an open-source community and experience in community management  
* Track record of steering volunteer groups.

## Skills

* Basic development and sysadmin skills: should be able to write and understand code to hack demos, and able to run a Matrix homeserver.  
* Excellent social skills, both online and in-person, and ability to create consensus and deescalate conflicts.  
* Excellent written and verbal communication skills in English.  
* Strong project management skills and autonomy.

## Key Results

* Organisation of The Matrix Conference and Matrix presence at FOSDEM.  
* Engagement on YouTube: we follow the view count and subscriptions on our YouTube channel to reach broad audiences.  
* Engagement on our socials: we follow the number of subscribers and tone of comments on Hacker News, [Lobste.rs](http://Lobste.rs), the Fediverse, Bluesky and LinkedIn  
* Engagement on the [matrix.org](http://matrix.org) website: we follow the number of visitors, bounce rate and more, in a privacy-respecting way, on our website.

---

To apply, please send an email to <thib@matrix.org> telling us why you think you would be a good fit for the role, and attach a CV.
