+++
title = "The German Digital Healthcare Agency joins the Matrix.org Foundation"
date = "2023-06-29T07:00:00Z"

[taxonomies]
author = ["Thib"]
category = ["Foundation"]

[extra]
image = "https://matrix.org/blog/img/gematik_2020.png"
+++

We were already proud to [announce](/blog/2021/07/21/germany-s-national-healthcare-system-adopts-matrix/)
that the national agency for the digitalisation of the healthcare system in
Germany ([gematik](http://gematik.de)) had selected Matrix as the open standard
on which to base all its interoperable instant messaging standard, back in 2021.

We are now delighted to let the world know that they are doubling down on
sovereignty and sustainability: gematik is the first organisation of the public
sector to join the Matrix.org Foundation as a Silver member.


## Collaboration in the public sector

Our friends at the [FSFE](https://fsfe.org) have been calling for software used
in public services to be free software in their
[Public Money Public Code campaign](https://publiccode.eu/en/openletter/). As
advocates of open standards and an open source project ourselves, this is
something we can get behind.

Software development can be an impenetrable world for people who don’t work in
the field. It can sometimes be difficult for people outside of our industry to
understand the importance of bitrotting and refactoring. One very unfortunate
effect of this is that **new features are easy to fund because they feel very
tangible, but the most critical housekeeping work is not as appealing**.

Yet, without regular refactoring to clean things up, it gets increasingly costly
and difficult to add new features. **Counterintuitively, spending money on “the
boring tasks” is the most efficient use of money**: without it the technical
stack would become either obsolete, bloated, or both, and it would be much more
costly to move to something else or maintain an in-house fork.

We’re very happy gematik is doing the right thing by supporting the technical
stack it builds TI-Messenger on. By supporting the Matrix.org Foundation,
gematik contributes to the sustainability of the protocol powering the
communications of the German healthcare system… but not exclusively.


## Sharing costs across public services, and with the private sector

Matrix is an open standard, which means not only everyone can use it: when
someone contributes to Matrix, everyone benefits from it. This makes Matrix
particularly interesting for the public sector: if the German healthcare
contributes to Matrix, the [German Armed Forces](https://element.io/case-studies/bundeswehr)
benefit from it, and the other way around. **It allows both to contribute less
of their budget, instead of contributing each to an entirely different
product.** The German Federal Ministry of Defence already actively contributes
to Matrix development and funding via its public IT services provider BWI GmbH,
who relies on Element’s consulting services to develop their own Matrix-based
messenger.

But Matrix being open source, it also allows the public and private sector to
share the costs of maintenance _by design_. **The public sector benefits from
the contributions of the private sector to Matrix, and the opposite is true as
well.**

The Foundation plays a critical technical _and social_ role in this system: it
centralises and curates contributions to the protocol so it remains unbiased,
coherent, and efficient.


## This is just a beginning

We’re extremely happy to welcome the first public sector organisation in the
Matrix.org Foundation! Given how popular Matrix is among governments and the
public sector in general, we know this is just a beginning: it would be
illogical to deploy any solution at a large scale without contributing to its
sustainability.

Whether you’re an organisation from the public or the private sector, looking to
cut costs down by building on a common, standard and reliable foundation, you
can [support Matrix](https://matrix.org/support/) and
[join the Foundation](https://matrix.org/membership/) today.
