---
date: '2022-03-08'
title: Synapse 1.54 released
categories:
- Releases
author: Brendan Abolivier
---

[Synapse 1.54](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.54.0) is
out! Let's see what goodness is coming your way with this new release.

## Improving URL previews

As part of the Matrix specification, Matrix clients have the option to rely on
the homeserver to generate URL previews. This means the homeserver (in this case
Synapse) needs to have a look at the content at that URL and extract data to
send back to the client.

In the past, Synapse has had issues with generating complete URL previews, and
some metadata (e.g. image, description) would be missing from the data that
Synapse sends to clients. Synapse 1.54 includes improvements to the generation
of URL previews, and while testing it we've been able to observe improvements to
previews generated for Twitter and Reddit.

## New module callbacks

Synapse modules allow third-party developers to write extra features for
Synapse, that wouldn't necessarily be generic enough to fit within the Matrix
specification. This includes custom behaviours such as smarter event filters,
bespoke media storage providers, or spam checkers. Since we rewrote Synapse's
module system in [Synapse
1.37](https://matrix.org/blog/2021/06/30/security-update-synapse-1-37-1-released#synapse-137-release-announcement),
we have been improving it by adding new callback functions that module can
implement, allowing them to interface better with Synapse.

Synapse 1.54 includes three new module callbacks. One of them,
[`get_displayname_for_registration`](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.54/modules/password_auth_provider_callbacks.html#get_displayname_for_registration),
allows modules to define the display name for newly registered users. Together
with the existing
[`get_username_for_registration`](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.54/modules/password_auth_provider_callbacks.html#get_username_for_registration)
introduced in [Synapse
1.52](https://matrix.org/blog/2022/02/08/synapse-1-52-released/), they allow
modules a better control over the user registration process.

The two other module callbacks introduced in Synapse 1.54,
[`on_profile_update`](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.54/modules/third_party_rules_callbacks.html#on_profile_update)
and
[`on_user_deactivation_status_changed`](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.54/modules/third_party_rules_callbacks.html#on_user_deactivation_status_changed),
allow modules to react to profile changes, as well as the deactivation (or
reactivation) of users.

## Everything else

This release of Synapse also includes more work to make joining large Matrix
rooms faster (I was telling you about that in the [Synapse 1.53 release
announcement](https://matrix.org/blog/2022/02/22/synapse-1-53-released)). While
it's still very experimental and not yet ready for show time, it's still very
exciting to see this work happening!

Synapse 1.54 also includes a change to the [client-side versions
endpoint](https://spec.matrix.org/latest/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientversions)
to advertise Matrix 1.1 and 1.2. See the [Matrix
1.2](https://matrix.org/blog/2022/02/02/matrix-v-1-2-release) release
announcement to read all about the changes this latest version of the
specification brings to the ecosystem.

See the [full
changelog](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.54.0) for a
complete list of changes in this release. Also please have a look at the
[upgrade
notes](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.54/upgrade#upgrading-to-v1540)
for this version.

Synapse is a Free and Open Source Software project, and we'd like to extend our
thanks to everyone who contributed to this release, including (in no particular
order) [Dirk Klimpel](https://github.com/dklimpel), [Andrew
Ryan](https://github.com/AndrewRyanChama), and
[lukasdenk](https://github.com/lukasdenk).
