---
date: '2022-03-22'
title: Synapse 1.55 released
categories:
- Releases
author: Brendan Abolivier
---

Hi all, [Synapse
1.55](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.55.0) is out! Let's
see the main talking points of this new release.

## Removing support for Mjolnir 1.3.1 and older

Administrators of large homeservers and communities will already be familiar
with [Mjolnir](https://github.com/matrix-org/mjolnir), which is a tool designed
to help them moderate a large number of rooms in an efficient way. It includes a
bot as well as a Synapse module to better interface with the homeserver.

Due to a change in how we manage some of Synapse's internal utilities, this
release of Synapse breaks compatibility with Mjolnir versions 1.3.1 and older.
Homeserver administrators using Mjolnir and upgrading to Synapse 1.55 should
make sure they're running Mjolnir version 1.3.2 or later.

See the [upgrade
notes](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.55/upgrade#compatibility-dropped-for-mjolnir-131-and-earlier)
for more information.

## Moving `synctl`

`synctl` is a tool provided as part of Synapse to run and manage your instance
and its workers (if any).

As part of our work to integrate [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) in Synapse
(which in turn will enable a lot of cool things, such as reproducible builds),
we have recently moved the way we package this tool. As of this release,
homeserver administrators should stop invoking it using its direct path (e.g.
`/path/to/synctl start`), but should instead call it directly, e.g. `synctl
start`.

This means homeserver administrators using `synctl` must make sure that the tool
is in their `PATH`. This is automatically done when installing and upgrading
Synapse using the `matrixdotorg/synapse` Docker image or Debian packages from
`packages.matrix.org`. When installing from a wheel, sdist, or PyPI, an
executable is created in your Python installation's `bin` directory.

See the [upgrade
notes](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.55/upgrade#synctl-script-has-been-moved)
for more information.

## Everything else

This release also introduces new module callbacks, allowing homeserver
administrators to more efficiently review which users are able to deactivate
users and shutdown rooms. More information on that in [Synapse's
documentation](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.55/modules/third_party_rules_callbacks.html#check_can_shutdown_room).

We have also started experimenting with using the native Python asyncio event
loop in Synapse which, if successful, would make it easier to use building
blocks from the Python ecosystem when adding new features to Synapse.

See the [full
changelog](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.55.0) for a
complete list of changes in this release. Also please have a look at the
[upgrade
notes](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.55/upgrade#upgrading-to-v1550)
for this version.

Synapse is a Free and Open Source Software project, and we'd like to extend our
thanks to everyone who contributed to this release, including (in no particular
order) [Dirk Klimpel](https://github.com/dklimpel),
[Beeper](https://www.beeper.com/), and
[~creme](https://github.com/cremesk).
