---
date: '2022-08-17'
title: Synapse 1.65 released
categories:
- Releases
author: Brendan Abolivier
---

Hey everyone! We've just released [Synapse
1.65](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.65.0)! Let's have a
peek at what's inside.

## Private read receipts

A feature that the more privacy-focused users of Matrix have been missing was
the ability to hide read receipts from other users. Read receipts in rooms can
tell a user which messages another user has read in a room. However, they can
also be an unwelcome indicator that a user is currently reading a certain room,
thus giving away the user's activity on Matrix at a given time.

Hiding one's read receipts from other Matrix users is unfortunately not as
straightforward as simply preventing a client from sharing read receipts with
the server. This is because read receipts are also used by Matrix homeservers to
calculate how much of a room a user has read, and generate notification counts
for rooms accordingly.

Synapse 1.65 introduces stable support for private read receipts. This feature,
described by
[MSC2285](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2285), allows
clients to send a different type of read receipt to the server. This then tells
the homeserver to use this piece of information to update the user's
notification counts, but not to share it with other users.

## Improved room management APIs for modules

This version of Synapse includes two new module API methods to help Synapse
modules interact and manage rooms. The first one,
[`lookup_room_alias`](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/v1.65.0/synapse/module_api/__init__.py#L1455-L1477),
allows modules to retrieve the room ID corresponding to a given room alias. This
works both for local and remote aliases. The second one,
[`create_room`](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/v1.65.0/synapse/module_api/__init__.py#L1479-L1528),
allows modules to create new rooms on behalf of an existing user.

The
[`update_room_membership`](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/v1.65.0/synapse/module_api/__init__.py#L925-L1017)
method has also been updated in this release of Synapse to allow modules to join
a room the server is not already in via federation. This can be done by using
the new `remote_room_hosts` argument, which takes a list of homeservers to try
to join via.

## Everything else

Synapse 1.65 stabilises the implementation of
[MSC3827](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3827), which
allows filtering public room searches on room types. This means it is now
possible to search specifically for public spaces. For more information on this
feature, see [the Synapse 1.63
announcement](https://matrix.org/blog/2022/07/20/synapse-1-63-released).

Additionally, Synapse 1.65 implements the new experimental error codes
documented by
[MSC3848](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3827). Once
stabilised, these error codes will allow clients to show more specific errors to
their users about why an event could not be sent.

See the [full
changelog](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.65.0) for a
complete list of changes in this release.

Synapse is a Free and Open Source Software project, and we'd like to extend our
thanks to everyone who contributed to this release, including (in no particular
order) [Beeper](https://www.beeper.com/),
[andrewdoh](https://github.com/andrewdoh), [Julian-Samuel
Geb√ºhr](https://github.com/moan0s) and [Dirk
Klimpel](https://github.com/dklimpel), as well as anyone helping us make Synapse
better by sharing their feedback and reporting issues.
