---
date: '2022-08-03'
title: Synapse 1.64 released
categories:
- Releases
author: Brendan Abolivier
---

It's that time again: there's a new Synapse release, fresh out of the oven!
Let's take a look at what's inside [Synapse
1.64](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.64.0).

## Delegating email verification is now deprecated

[Synapse 1.4.0](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.4.0)
introduced a configuration option (`account_threepid_delegates.email`) to allow
homeservers to delegate validating the ownership of email addresses to an
external identity server. This validation is used by Synapse when adding an
email address to a Matrix account, or before performing a password reset.

As of Synapse 1.64, this option is deprecated, and Synapse will print a warning
if it is used. This is because this option relies on old API endpoints that have
since been
[removed](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/changelog/#identity-service-api-1-1) from the
Matrix specification.

Synapse can do this validation internally provided it is configured with details
of an SMTP server. Administrators currently relying on
`account_threepid_delegates.email` should therefore ensure that an SMTP server
is correctly configured, and remove the `account_threepid_delegates.email`
option. See the [configuration
guide](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.64/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#email)
for more information.

We plan to fully remove this configuration option in Synapse 1.66, which is
expected to be released on August 30th.

Note that the equivalent option to validate the ownership of phone numbers
(`account_threepid_delegates.msisdn`) can still be used, though we expect to
deprecate it in a future release of Synapse.

## Improved TLS support for sending emails

When configuring an SMTP server to use to send out emails to users, server
administrators can configure Synapse to use TLS to communicate to that server.
Until now, only [STARTTLS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunistic_TLS) was
supported in this case.

Synapse 1.64 introduces a new `force_tls` configuration option in the `email`
section of the configuration file. If this new setting is set to `true` Synapse
will use TLS for the initial connection rather than upgrading via STARTTLS.

See the [configuration
guide](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.64/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#email)
for more information.

## Memory leak in `frozendict`

A couple of weeks ago, we
[identified](https://github.com/Marco-Sulla/python-frozendict/issues/60) a
memory leak within [frozendict](https://pypi.org/project/frozendict/), which is
a library that Synapse relies on. This would in turn cause Synapse instances to
slowly leak memory when processing `/sync` requests.

We highly encourage server administrators who installed Synapse via `pip` to
upgrade their local version of `frozendict` to version 2.3.3 or later, which
includes a fix to this issue. The Docker image `matrixdotorg/synapse` and the
Debian packages from `packages.matrix.org` already include the updated library.

## Everything else

This version of Synapse introduces support for room version 10! This new room
version enables support for the new `knock_restricted` join rule, to allow
knocking into rooms which are otherwise restricted to members of a specific room
(or space). See [the Matrix specification about room version
10](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/rooms/v10/) for more information.

Additionally, Synapse 1.64 features a new rate limiter to limit the rate of joins to the same
room. It is intended as a mitigation against abuse scenarios involving joining a
lot of users from different homeservers to a room to then send spam across it.
See the [configuration
guide](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#rc_joins_per_room)
for more information.

This release of Synapse also extends the [List
Rooms](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/admin_api/rooms.html#list-room-api)
and [Room
Details](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/admin_api/rooms.html#room-details-api)
admin APIs to include the type of a room in responses, allowing server
administrators to differentiate spaces from other rooms.

See the [full
changelog](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.64.0) for a
complete list of changes in this release. Also please have a look at the
[upgrade
notes](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.64/upgrade#upgrading-to-v1640)
for this version.

Synapse is a Free and Open Source Software project, and we'd like to extend our
thanks to everyone who contributed to this release, including (in no particular
order) [Beeper](https://www.beeper.com/),
[andrewdoh](https://github.com/andrewdoh), [Thomas
Weston](https://github.com/thomasweston12), [jejo86](https://github.com/jejo86),
[villepeh](https://github.com/villepeh), [Jörg
Behrmann](https://github.com/behrmann) and [Jacek
Kuśnierz](https://github.com/Vetchu), as well as anyone helping us make Synapse
better by sharing their feedback and reporting issues.
