---
date: '2022-06-17'
title: Synapse 1.61 released
categories:
- Releases
author: Brendan Abolivier
---

Hey everyone! Guess what? [Synapse
1.61](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.61.0) is out! Let's
have a look at it.

## Farewell, groups

If you are new to Matrix, you might have not heard of the feature referred to as
"groups" or "communities" (depending on the context). This feature allowed
grouping rooms and users to better represent a community, one of which being
`+matrix:matrix.org` which used to represent the Matrix community. This may
sound similar to [Matrix
Spaces](https://matrix.org/blog/2021/05/17/the-matrix-space-beta), and it would
make sense since Spaces are meant to be a more powerful replacement for groups.

In [Synapse 1.56](https://matrix.org/blog/2022/04/05/synapse-1-56-released),
support for groups was deprecated, with a plan to fully remove it in a
later release of Synapse. This has now been done as of Synapse 1.61, and most of the
code supporting this feature has now been removed.

Note that this means that administrators of homeservers using workers can remove
endpoints related to groups from their reverse proxy configuration. See [the
upgrade
notes](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.61/upgrade.html#removal-of-deprecated-communitygroups)
for more information.

## Media retention

A common issue we see homeserver administrators struggle with is managing the
disk space used by Synapse. A non-negligible part of that disk space usage is
dedicated to storing files uploaded by Matrix users, both local and remote.

Up until now Synapse would only provide administrators with limited, manual ways
to manage the media store of their homeserver, via the [admin
API](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/develop/admin_api/media_admin_api.html).

As of this release, Synapse now allows administrators to define retention
lifetimes for local and remote media. This allows media that hasn't been
accessed in a long time to be automatically deleted, therefore freeing up disk
space. Server administrators wishing to control media retention more finely can
also define different policies for remote and local media.

This feature can be enabled by configuring the `media_retention` setting, see
[the configuration
guide](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/develop/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#media_retention)
for more information.

## Everything else

This release of Synapse introduces a change in the return value of the
`check_event_for_spam` spam checker module callback, in order to allow modules
more flexibility in communicating to users why their messages are rejected. This
is part of ongoing improvement works around spam checker callbacks, watch this
space next time for more information!

See the [full
changelog](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.61.0) for a
complete list of changes in this release. Also please have a look at the
[upgrade
notes](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.61/upgrade#upgrading-to-v1610)
for this version.

Synapse is a Free and Open Source Software project, and we'd like to extend our
thanks to everyone who contributed to this release, including (in no particular
order) [Beeper](https://www.beeper.com/), [Dirk
Klimpel](https://github.com/dklimpel) and [Jacek
Ku≈õnierz](https://github.com/Vetchu).
